Although Jane decided to decline participation in the smoker study, it is likely she was still required to disclose her smoker status when acquiring her life insurance policy (Brooks, 2025). Life insurance companies often require medical exams and blood tests as part of their application process, so in the case that Jane did not explicitly disclose her smoker status, the life insurance company could identify nicotine in her blood and deduce that she is a frequent smoker (Kinney, 2025). The privacy concerns of this scenario hinge on the fact that Jane voluntarily participated in the life insurance plan, and in doing so, was required to disclose information about her health, including her smoker status.

The practice of raising life insurance rates for "high risk" individuals is ubiquitous in the life insurance industry. In fact, smoker status is just one of many factors used by life insurance providers to identify risk class. There are six risk classes: Preferred Plus/Elite, Preferred, Standard Plus, Standard, Substandard/Rated, and Smoker (Kagan, 2023). Smokers occupy their own risk class, paying the highest premium. Average premiums for smokers are nearly five times higher than those for non-smokers (Harthill, 2024).

Based on the assumption that Jane's life insurance provider followed industry standard practice, such as having Jane undergo a medical exam, the provider is not violating Jane's privacy. Acquiring the life insurance policy is a voluntary act on Jane's part, and providing personal information, such as her name, age, weight, smoker status, and other health-related factors are required by the provider (Kagan, 2023). If the life insurance provider identifies additional risk as a result of a study that Jane declined participation in, it is still within their right to raise Jane's rate based on their existing knowledge of her smoker status.

Sources:

Bankrate – Tobacco and Life Insurance
Brooks, A. (2025, February 12). Tobacco and life insurance: Here's what you should know. Bankrate. https://www.bankrate.com/insurance/life-insurance/how-long-does-tobacco-stay-in-your-system/

Investopedia – Insurance Risk Class
Kagan, J. (2023, May 20). Insurance risk class definition and associated premium costs. Investopedia. https://www.investopedia.com/terms/i/insurance-risk-class.asp

U.S. News – When Do You Need a Medical Exam for Life Insurance?
Kinney, J. (2025, April 25). When do you need a medical exam for life insurance? https://www.usnews.com/insurance/life-insurance/when-do-you-need-a-medical-exam

NerdWallet – Life Insurance for Smokers — and Quitters
Harthill, R. (2024, July 18). Life insurance for smokers — and quitters. NerdWallet. https://www.nerdwallet.com/article/insurance/life-insurance-nonsmoker
